# EO w43

Personal Economic Outlook - Understanding PCA Analysis

Turns out doing a good PCA analysis was harder than I thought. So this week I'll be writing a more personal version of the economic outlook.

Deadlines and Expectations

We all have, or at least speaking for myself, I often have unrealistic and idealistic expectations for myself. And from experience I know that I won't reach them 100%, but this is also fine because I know that getting 10% of the way to the moon is still a pretty good HEO (Highly Elliptical Orbit) around earth.

There is always only one true way of knowing what will happen in the future and that is simply by extrapolation, either in a detailed Monte Carlo simulation or in real time by just simply waiting, obviously.

A Brief Introduction to PCA

Despite this, I predict that next week will be a good presentation of a PCA analysis showing the explained variance and principal components of the 500 biggest publicly listed Norwegian companies.

PCA is not a commonly known thing so I'll explain it here for readers next week. It is really worth knowing about because it is a really good way to make sense of high dimensional data.

"What do I know about high dimensional data? Nothing in my life is ever more than 3-dimensional," you might be thinking for yourself at first. However, let me give you an example of a highly dimensional dataset you already know or have a feeling of many pieces of: The set of all world countries and their corresponding attributes such as latitude, longitude, GDP, population, climate, standard of living, employment rate, life expectancy, and many more.

In a table form it would look something like this:

Country Population (millions) GDP per capita ($) Employment Rate (%) Life Expectancy (years)
USA 335 86,533 75.0 77
Norway 5.6 78,700 77.4 83
UK 68 48,900 75.0 81
South Africa 60 6,330 58.0 64
Lesotho 2.3 1,200 52.0 54
Costa Rica 5.2 12,500 62.0 78
Spain 48 30,500 67.0 84
Bhutan 0.8 3,400 65.0 72
Singapore 5.9 90,674 73.0 84

How would we plot these? We could do one plot of population on the x-axis and GDP on the other, or maybe even make a 3D plot of population on x, GDP on y, and climate on z. This way we can see if there are relationships between these factors, such as the fact that high populations correlate with GDP to a certain degree because we seem to have a row of countries in a certain line.

However, what if we wanted to just look at all of them at once? Unfortunately we can't. We would need an x-axis, y-axis, z-axis, and many more axes. No one can comprehend so many dimensions at once. However, we can project them using some clever linear algebra with regards to eigenvectors and eigenvalues.

Understanding PCA Through Projection

Anyhow, if you don't want to dive into the mathematics, you can think of projecting 3 dimensions onto 2 dimensions like this: Imagine you have a child's toy of a mechanical model of the solar system hanging from the roof above the bed. Then you have a lamp in the room that casts a shadow from the 3D toy onto the wall. This is how we can think of projecting a higher dimension (3 in this case) onto a 2-dimensional plane.

PCA illustration

But remember, we can still choose where to place the lamp. So to make things less arbitrary and more meaningful, for each dimension we reduce, we choose the angle that maximizes the spread of the objects on the wall. In this case with the orrery of the solar system, that would be somewhere from the side where all the planets are on roughly the same plane.

Principal Components and Explained Variance

In PCA analysis, we create new axes called principal components (PC1, PC2, PC3, etc.). PC1 is the direction that captures the most variance in the data. PC2 captures the second most variance and is perpendicular to PC1, and so on. The explained variance tells us how much of the total variation in our data is captured by each principal component.

For example, if PC1 has 45% explained variance, it means that this single axis captures 45% of all the variation in our multi-dimensional dataset. If PC2 has 25% explained variance, then together PC1 and PC2 capture 70% of the variation. This allows us to reduce many dimensions down to just 2 or 3 that we can actually visualize and understand, while still retaining most of the important information.

Next week, I'll present the full PCA analysis of the 500 largest publicly listed Norwegian companies, showing which financial metrics drive the most variance in company performance and how companies cluster together in this reduced dimensional space.

Stay tuned for next week's post on Tuesday!
